---
title: Nanowrimo 2023
author: Luna
---

**Content Warning: Discussions of Abuse, Horror, Racism, Ablism, Grooming**

# Introduction

I've been writing the same novel for over three years. It's gotten to the point where when I'm on a train or sat at home without anything else to do, I'll think:

> "I really wish I'd finish that novel already."

And it's not just because it's the only novel idea I have. I have several floating around inside my skull at any given time. It's just that this particular novel had too much I liked about it to leave it alone forever. Its strange how the application of an idea plus time can leave you with this hollow, empty feeling that you should have done it, you could have done it had you been a stronger person.

But how on Earth am I ever going to motivate myself to push out a first draft when so many other attempts I've had failed? How do I know this won't drag on another three years and I'll feel even more regret than if I simply committed to working on other projects? Will I be doomed to become one of *those* writers for the rest of my life?

Since I am of a nervous disposition I often find myself thinking questions like this about my writing all the time. And all of this is further exacerbated by the fact that, because this is my first novel and there's no guarantee of a second, that this will be the only novel I ever write. And that has lead to a lot of weird decisions and thinking about my creative process that is deeply unhelpful.

Thankfully, there's a clean and elegant solution to all of this.

# The National Novel Writing Month
I do so loathe dictionary introductions to concepts in non-fiction writing. If you can't use a search engine, why are you even attempting to engage with the subject matter in a critical manner in the first place? Despite this, I still have people come up to me and tell me they have absolutely no idea what on Earth I'm talking about so here goes.

The National Novel Writing Month (hiterto referred to as "NaNoWriMo") is an annual challenge organised by charity in which you must write 50,000 words of a new novel in a month. It's been going ever since 1999 and has been the genesis of many a new novel over the years.

I've actually taken part in it a number of times myself after I was introduced to it very closely to the event happening in 2021. Just for the sake of posterity I'll write about how each of those years went quickly so when I need to explain them again, I can just link to this post instead of having to repeat myself.

## 2020
At this point, I was very much a "some day" writer. One of those authors who wants to write a book "some day" without any serious intention to release it or have it scrutinised by any other living thing. I had read books. I had even entered a couple of short fiction competitions and won. But for whatever reason me and writing just never really came together. When I heard of the challenge it almost seemed to simplistic. There was no way you could ever write a novel like this. It simply wasn't possible. But I was determined to try.

I had about a week to prepare. I spent about none of that time seriously giving it my best shot. I briefly had an idea to write a book about a man going to great lengths to participate in the competition before being sent on the run after something strange and mysterious happens. But this got shelved very quickly when I had what I believed to be a golden egg of an idea:

Lesbian Amazonian Catgirls

Thankfully when the deadline hit it didn't go anywhere. Turns out this whole writing thing was way way harder than I thought. I managed to write about a single scene that I liked and the rest of it was stream of consciousness garbage trying to fill word count. A lot of it writing whatever I happened to think was funny that day which was almost certainly not funny at all.

A lot of scenes that went nowhere with no underlying plot structure and prose that looked like a chimpanzee ordered a fly to write it. There was some stuff I liked. There was a particular scene where a character was being berated by their mother that had a strange amount of emotional bite to it, but since it didn't connect to the loose connection of pocket fluff that I would call a plot structure it would almost certainly have to be cut anyway.

The problem was that I was surrounded by much more competant writers and I felt a childish need to show off to everyone how brilliant I was. But it wasn't an entire waste of time! I did find the research process engaging and it did prove to me that novel writing was possible, even if it was about as difficult as I expected.

## 2021
I'm going to mostly be skipping over this year because of how it intersects with this one. Needless to say I felt that I should be taking someone else's advice for once and creating a short story collection or an anthology in an attempt to give myself the opportunity to work on other things. This didn't pan out and I ended up having to skip this year entirely.

## 2022
This was going to be the year that I would complete the challenge as intended. I started my planning early. I was going to do it right. Ultimately it didn't work out as planned. I had to change the entire concept of the novel halfway through. At first it was kind of a depressing, nautical themed horror that I feel would be much better for a video game than a book.

The other idea I had was to write a magical girl murder mystery. This also ended up being seriously depressing and I bailed on it after 20,000 words. Real life seriously got in the way and I'd love to return to this concept as well.

## 2023
So I suppose that leads me to today where I'm trying to get a number of things going and working on the current novel.

# Backstory
This novel originally started with a sketch.

This one cat character is to blame for hundreds of hours being poured into a creative project I believed in. And it ended up being entirely different to how I expected.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

This is me going over rthe thing that I did this month. I feel that when I start drafting I need to spend some time and just get into the mood. I feel that it might take some timee and I may make soem false starts. When I'm writing stream of consciousness like this, I discover that kats are cute. No, I mean that I tend to repeat myself a lot. I should probably start by outlining the sections that I want:

- What I did
- Background
- What I learned
- What went wrong


All the basic things that a novel of this type is intended to have. As much space as I have I probably should do some research on how these kinds of things work, specifically retrospectives and postmortem reports.

# Introduction

I have been working on a novel for the past three years. I've been working on several, actually. I think that it was about time and went and finished it. But this presents a problem. How do I create an entire novel in a short amount of time without it becoming a large amount of effort and dragging on for a further three years?

# Chris Baty
The national novel writing months is a writing challenge started in 1999 by Chris Baty. The goal is simple. Starting on November the first and ending on November the Thirtieth, you must write 50,000 words of a new novel. No exceptions.

# How I went about this.
I've actually done this challenge a number of times. The first time I attempted this challenge, I was working on a novel about a tribe of catgirl amazons. There was a giant tiki mech battle at the end. Let it never see the light of day. The second time was a little more organised. I wanted to write a short story collection but ultimately never ended up taking part. I also had two more attempts, one being a horror novel that I'd want to adapt into a traditional survival horror game and the other would be a magical girl murder mystery that I very much intend on finishing.

So I already have some experience. I know how gruelling this challenge can be. What I have learned from doing this before is that I am not someone who is able to be spontaneous. If I'm writing a story that has any kind of plot or characters to it, I can't just go and figure out the story. I need to know where things were going.

Fortunately, this book has already been through three years of preproduction hell. In other words it was almost like free labour where I didn't have to do much to figure out what was going to happen to the story during the month. Most of the work here was just going over my notes and figuring out what this story was about and how I would build it.

There was a lot to go over. I tend to plan stories through hand writing and they tend to change a lot before they actually go to be read by someone else. Usually when I have the idea, I have the entirely wrong idea. If you have your entire idea or. Sorry. If you are a writer yourself, I'd take the lesson away from this that no piece of writing comes out fully formed.

On top of this, upon going over my notes it was imminently clear that I had a lot of growing to do. Some parts of the novel seem reflective of beliefs that I held at the time but no longer do. Or otherwise I still have those ideas wedged deep into my head but I'm starting to do the due diligence to get rid of them.

A lot of my new planning came in the form of fixing up timelines and giving the characters new names. These tasks weren't probably the best use of my time given the fact that the action sections weren't planned until days before the event.

So without further ado, I'd like to share some things that I have learned over the course of doing this challenge and others like it.

# Lessons Learned
## Write By Hand
If you're not physically able to write by hand, you can sit this one out, but what I've found is that I write worse when I have a keyboard in my hands. I will never claim that writing by hand is very transmissible or practical. The speed of writing by hand can be excruciating. I write about 67 words per miute on an actual keyboard and it turns out that I only write about 220 words every 40 minutes when writing by hand.

Those kinds of numbers are not the ones you want to see if your goal is to release a lot of fiction before your inevitable demise.

What it does do however, is force you to slow down. There's a clear difference between those two things. When you're forced to write at handwriting speeds, it changes your mindset to make each word count. I've come across at least one other writer who feels the same way, so two people can't be as wrong as one, right?

I find myself choosing my words more carefully when writing by hand. Typing them up can be pretty thoughtless and I personally find it motivating to see the number of physical pages lying around my desk. However, for this challenge I feel it might have been a mistake.

You see, when you're writing by hand, you have no idea how many words you've written. you only have the words that you feel took a lot of effort to write. This is a big difference. For me, I needed at least 40 pages completed before I realised that I could fit an average of 220 pages handwritten on sheets of lined A4 paper. So that's 220 per side.

This lead to me being dangerously behind. I started to lag almost immediately because I grossly underestimated how much effort that would take. I'm not sure I would do it again, but in general I much prefer not looking at a screen when it comes to my first draft. I feel like I will get better results for this blog by using the keyboard but only because of the format.

## Plan ahead
I feel like I already mentioned this one? If you have a plan you won't have to come up with a new story entirely from scratch. This can box you in, so I prefer to be a little looser with my planning and work on scenes spontaneously while also knowing where I'm going.

## Write out of order
By now you might have gotten the idea that all I'm saying is very basic advice. thts because I'm a very basic writer. I've only been doing this seriously for less than four years, about the length of your average university course. Not that I'd ever compare myself to a university major in this field of course.

# The Novel
So I feel I should also talk about the specific challenges and discoveries I had with the novel itself, but I feel that it might spoil too much of the plot? I also feel some of the other things with how the book deals with race and gender aren't things I'm willing to discuss as of the time that it isn't out yet.

So it's a gothic horror novel right? Wrong!

In planning this novel, I realised that there is a massive problem with genre. You see, I had planned this as a gothic horror after bouncing between fantasy, mystery and conspiracy thriller. But when I looked at this hollistically I realised that what I was actually writing was a form of shakespearian tragedy. Which makes sense.

# The Controversy
I was kind of half asleep when it happened. I didn't hear about the events until way after they had transpired. I really don't like discussing things of this nature and would encourage anyone expecting me to talk about it to do their own research. I don't use the Nanowrimo forums and use a private discord server that had nothing to do with the controversy.

I really don't know how to feel about it honestly. My main concern is that ayone who was hurt was able to get help and it seems like the response by Nanowrimo themselves has been mature and trying to get to a point where somelthing like this never happens again.

# Conclusion
I just want to get to the end of this blog post so I can get along to the next drafts. I look forward to seeing you again next year.